JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
DONALD TRUMP, President
of the United States:
I am canceling the last
administration's completely
one-sided deal with Cuba.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
rolls back some of Obama's
efforts to normalize U.S.-Cuba
relations, reviving
travel restrictions to
the communist nation.
Then, I sit down with retired
General David Petraeus to ask
about the Trump administration's
military strategy, including
reports that it will send 4,000
more troops to Afghanistan.
GEN.
DAVID PETRAEUS, Former
Commander, U.S. Central
Command: We need to
recognize that we went
there for a reason, and we
have stayed for a reason, to
ensure that Afghanistan is not
once again a sanctuary for
al-Qaida or other transnational
extremists, the way it was when
the 9/11 attacks
were planned there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
analyze the latest in the
Russia investigation, the state
of partisanship in our
country, plus the rest
of the week's news.
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
is now apparently acknowledging
he is under investigation for
possible obstruction of justice.
He tweeted today about
news reports that special
counsel Robert Mueller
has expanded his probe
of Russian meddling
in the election.
The president said: "I am being
investigated for firing the
FBI director by the man who
told me to fire
the FBI director."
That would be Deputy Attorney
General Rod Rosenstein.
He authored a memo criticizing
James Comey before Comey
was fired last month.
Rosenstein now oversees
Mueller, but several news
outlets reported today
that he, Rosenstein,
may yet recuse himself.
Late today, the president
released his most recent
financial disclosure.
It covers January 2016
through this spring.
But it does not
list exact income.
It does say that he resigned
from more than 500 business
positions, many of them one day
before the inauguration.
He listed at least $315
million in liabilities,
about the same as last year.
Mr. Trump spent much of this
day in Miami rolling back some
of President Obama's opening
to Cuba.
The new policy seeks to reduce
the flow of U.S. dollars to
businesses controlled by the
Cuban military.
We will have a full report
later in the program.
In London, anger over an
apartment tower fire boiled over
today, as officials raised the
death toll to 30, with
dozens still missing.
Jackie Long of
Independent Television
News filed this report.
JACKIE LONG: As the days
pass, the anger grows.
It is raw and it is visceral.
MAN: Shame on you!
Shame on you!
JACKIE LONG: This
afternoon, family and
friends of the victims and
others from across London
took that anger to the local
council, storming the town hall.
Earlier, a more subdued
response as the queen and
duke of Cambridge visited
one of the makeshift
relief centers set up in
a local sports center.
They met residents
and volunteers.
The queen praised the bravery of
firefighters, with a desperate
father in the crowd holding
a picture of his children.
MAN: Please.
Come here.
Come here, please.
JACKIE LONG: The duke
promised, "I will come back."
MAN: I will be back.
I will come back.
JACKIE LONG: The prime
minister today announced
a five million-pound
emergency relief fund,
but it wasn't enough to
assuage the anger of some.
Criticized yesterday for
visiting, but failing to talk to
residents, she came back today
and was met with this.
WOMAN: Murderer!
Murderer!
JACKIE LONG: Also today, in
a recent statement, the prime
minister assured residents that
the government is there for all
the victims of this tragedy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jackie Long of
Independent Television News.
The Guardian newspaper reported
today that renovations to
the apartment tower used a
cheaper exterior paneling,
instead of a flame-resistant
version that's more expensive.
Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah
Ali Khamenei, is charging
that new sanctions approved by
the U.S. Senate violate
the 2015 nuclear deal.
The sanctions are aimed at
Tehran's missile program.
Today, a senior adviser
to Khamenei said they
are unquestionably a
breach of both the spirit
and the letter of the
nuclear agreement.
The spokesman promised
that Iran will respond.
Russia's military says that
it may have killed Abu Bakr
al-Baghdadi, the Islamic State's
leader, in an airstrike.
The Defense Ministry in Moscow
said today the strike happened
late last month in Syria.
It said it is still
verifying the claim.
U.S. officials say they have
seen no evidence that it's true.
The U.N. Refugee Agency warned
today that 100,000 Iraqi
civilians remain trapped behind
Islamic State lines
in Western Mosul.
The officials say that
ISIS militants are
using the civilians as
human shields, as they
continue to lose ground.
The announcement came in Geneva.
MAN: If you put yourself in
their situation, you know, when
you may have a fighter on top
of your roof, attracting the
artillery fire, you can imagine
in which condition of penury
and panic they live, being
unable to flee and knowing
that, if they try to flee, if
they are caught,
they will be killed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Iraqi government
forces have been fighting to
retake Mosul since October.
Back in this country,
a Massachusetts woman
was convicted today of
involuntary manslaughter
for urging her boyfriend
to commit suicide.
Michelle Carter sent hundreds
of text messages to Conrad Roy.
In July of 2014, Roy
filled his truck with
deadly carbon monoxide,
then got out, contacted
Carter, and told
her he was scared.
She responded: "Get back in."
She could get as much
as 20 years in prison.
Doctors in Washington now
say that Representative
Steve Scalise can hope
to make a full recovery
after being shot this week.
He was gravely wounded
when a gunman opened
fire at a congressional
Republican baseball
practice.
Scalise is still in critical
condition, and is expected
to have additional surgery.
On Wall Street today, the Dow
Jones industrial average gained
24 points to close at 21384.
The Nasdaq fell 13 points, and
the S&P 500 added a fraction.
For the week, the Dow
and the S&P rose a
fraction of a percent.
The Nasdaq fell
nearly 1 percent.
The man who brought about
Germany's reunification,
Helmut Kohl, died today.
He became chancellor of West
Germany in 1982 and guided the
rejoining with East Germany
after the Berlin Wall fell
and the Soviet Bloc collapsed.
Helmut Kohl ultimately served
as chancellor for 16 years.
He was 87 years old.
And Los Angeles temporarily
turned into Gotham City
last night in memory
of Adam West, who
played Batman on
the 1960s TV show.
Hundreds of fans gathered
to watch as officials
flipped a switch and
flashed the iconic Bat
Signal on city hall.
Adam West died this
week at the age of 88.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
my conversation with former
General David Petraeus on the
fight in Afghanistan; new
travel and business restrictions
between the U.S. and Cuba; and
much more.
Wars in Afghanistan, Syria, and
Iraq, tensions within the Gulf
states, and a new administration
trying to manage an exploding
region, all topics for retired
General David Petraeus.
He commanded American and
coalition forces in the wars in
Iraq and Afghanistan, and served
as overall commander of
U.S. military operations
in the Middle East.
He later served as director
of the CIA in 2011 and 2012.
He's now with a global
investment firm.
We spoke a short time ago.
And I started by asking him
about reports that the Trump
administration will soon send
4,000 additional U.S. troops
to Afghanistan, and whether
he thinks it is a smart move.
GEN.
DAVID PETRAEUS (RET.),
Former Commander, U.S.
Central Command: I think
it is, and it's heartening.
I think what we need to get to
in Afghanistan is a sustainable,
measuring the expenditure
of blood and treasure,
a sustainable,
sustained commitment.
We need to recognize that we
went there for a reason and we
stayed for a reason, to ensure
that Afghanistan is not
once again a sanctuary
for al-Qaida or other
transnational extremists,
the way it was when the 9/11
attacks were planned there.
That's why we need to stay.
We also have a very useful
platform there for the regional
counterterrorist effort.
And, of course, we have greatly
reduced the capabilities of
al-Qaida's senior leaders
in that region, including,
of course, taking
out Osama bin Laden.
But this is a
generational struggle.
This is not something that is
going to be won in a few years.
We're not going to take
a hill, plant a flag, go
home to a victory parade.
And we need to be there for
the long haul, but in a way
that is, again, sustainable.
We have been in Korea
for 65-plus years because
there is an important
national interest for
that.
We were in Europe for a very
long period of time, still
there, of course, and actually
with a renewed emphasis
now, given Russia's
aggressive actions.
And I think that's the way
we need to approach this.
Now, to be sure, the forces...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are you
saying we may need to stay in
Afghanistan 60, 70, 80 years?
GEN.
DAVID PETRAEUS: I wouldn't say
60, but I think we shouldn't
approach this as a year-on-year
mission.
I think that was
actually harmful.
I think it gave all of the
Afghan leaders and so forth were
-- basically get the jitters.
Those who are investing money
consider every year whether
to keep it there or whether to
go to Dubai.
I think this is an important
interest, and I think we ought
to have a sustained commitment,
but at a level that
is sustainable.
And I think a few more, 3,000
to 5,000 more troops, are
very sustainable, but also we
should relax the remaining
restrictions on the use of our
airpower to support our Afghan
partners who have shown that
they are willing to fight and
die for their country against
al-Qaida, the insurgents of
various types and so forth.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, of course,
the reason I'm asking, as
Americans look at Afghanistan,
you say we may need to
stay decades and decades.
We have been there, the
United States, 15 years.
At times, we have had over
100,000 U.S. troops there.
That didn't turn
back the Taliban.
Why should 3,000 or 4,000?
GEN.
DAVID PETRAEUS: It did
actually turn back the Taliban.
You will remember I
was the commander.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But
not permanently.
GEN.
DAVID PETRAEUS: Not permanently.
As I said, we are not going
to permanently win this.
Keep in mind, there's a huge
difference between Afghanistan
and even Iraq when we did the
surge there.
You can't pressure the leaders
of the Afghan Taliban, the
Haqqani Network, and even some
of the other insurgent
groups, because they're
out of our reach.
They're in sanctuaries
inside Pakistan.
And, indeed, there should be
a regional effort there to try
to get our Pakistani partners
to do more to deny this
sanctuary to those elements that
are making life so difficult
for Afghans and the
Afghan government.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The other
comment being made, General
Petraeus, though, is
that the administration
has not laid out what its
strategy is for Afghanistan.
General Mattis himself said this
week, we're still working on it.
GEN.
DAVID PETRAEUS: They are.
And, indeed, I understand
there have been a number of
meetings at the principals level
and so forth.
The national security
team is working on that.
I do think you can anticipate
an integrated strategy.
Again, the troops are
just a part of this.
They're an important part,
because, without them, without
halting the erosion of security
that has characterized
Afghanistan over the
last year or more, then
you're going to have
a serious problem on your hands.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let's talk
about ISIS in Syria - - you
mentioned Syria -- and in Iraq.
We are told progress is being
made against ISIS on the
battlefield, but the coalition
airstrikes, we are now told,
these Strikes are resulting
in hundreds and hundreds of
civilian deaths.
Is that the price that
Americans should be prepared
to pay to get ahead of ISIS?
GEN.
DAVID PETRAEUS: We should
absolutely minimize the civilian
deaths, and there's no question
that there will
be more of these.
This does happen in wartime.
There will be far fewer than
certainly what the extremists,
these very barbaric Islamic
State forces, have done.
But this is an enemy
that's literally sheltering
among the civilians.
That's what's making it so
difficult to take this last
remnant of the Islamic State in
Mosul.
This is now old
Mosul, the Old City.
And, remember, I spent a year
there as a two-star when we were
in charge of Northern Iraq with
the 101st Airborne.
It's a rabbits warren.
It's very tight.
It's very difficult.
And the enemy has literally just
-- literally barricaded itself
in there with snipers, with
suicide bombers, with
explosives, rooms
and houses rigged,
surrounding themselves with
civilians.
And this is the most
diabolically difficult
challenge, even for the very
skilled counterterrorism
forces of the Iraqi army.
That's what's really
slowed this down.
We can expect some
of that in Raqqa.
That operation has
now began in Syria.
That was until recently
presumably the Islamic
State headquarters.
There are reports that some of
these leaders have already led
and moved town the Euphrates
River Valley further
to Deir el-Zour.
That's going to be a tough
fight, but it's a much
smaller city compared
to the two million,
let's say, of probably a quarter
or less the size of Mosul.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I'm moving us
through some very difficult
areas very quickly, but I now
want to turn now to Saudi
Arabia, the Gulf nations.
President Trump was there just
very recently trying to put
-- present a united front with
the Saudis and these
other countries, mainly
against Iran, but it
turns out they are -- they
have turned against Qatar, and
the president has signaled that
he has problems with Qatar's
support for
terrorist activities.
At the same time, his
administration has said,
we hope these countries
can work together.
What is the strategy,
the approach that the
United -- that we should
expect, that we should
understand as Americans
about the administration's
policy there?
GEN.
DAVID PETRAEUS: Well,
Secretary of State Tillerson
is taking charge of this now.
He's trying to get the
temperature down some.
Clearly, there's been a
frustration that boiled
over with the Emiratis,
our close partners
the Emiratis and the
Saudis, against our other
close partners the Qataris.
Of course, it's the Central
Command forward headquarters.
My forward headquarters
is inside -- outside Doha
at Al Udeid Air Base.
They gave us $100
million for that.
But I have to say, at times,
I went there and said, look,
you're giving us all this
money for our forward
headquarters, and then
Al-Jazeera is hammering
us every day in the
news.
There is something
not right here.
And similar frustrations have,
again, just boiled over, also,
the allegations of support
of political Islam.
You have to understand that,
for the Emiratis especially,
there is more worry about Muslim
Brotherhood kind of activity
than there actually is with
Iran or even the Islamic State.
Crown Prince Mohammed bin Zayed
will explain, we can see the
extremists, we can see the
Iranians.
The insidious creep of political
Islam is more difficult.
And Qatar has allowed the heads
of Hamas, Muslim Brothers, other
political Islam organizations
in the region to locate there.
These are all three our
friends, our partners.
I hope would be that, in
this case, Secretary of
State Tillerson can indeed
get the temperatures
down, get talking going on
behind closed doors, rather than
out as visibly as it has been,
because that makes it very
difficult, and you start to back
different friends into corners.
But it's hard.
The United States, in some
respects, needs to avoid being
engaged in a beauty contest,
where we have to say which
is the fairest of them all.
That's not fair to us and
it's not fair to them.
And I think that this
is resolvable, but it's
not going to be easy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: General
David Petraeus, thank you
very much for stopping by.
GEN.
DAVID PETRAEUS:
Pleasure, as always.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As we reported
earlier, President Trump took
steps to roll back some parts of
the Obama administration's
opening to Cuba, which began
two-and-a-half years ago.
John Yang reports now on what's
out and what stays in effect.
JOHN YANG: President Trump
made the announcement
in Miami's Little Havana
before an enthusiastic
crowd in a packed auditorium.
DONALD TRUMP, President of
the United States: Effective
immediately, I am canceling the
last administration's completely
one-sided deal with Cuba.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: While the president's
action falls short of canceling,
he said it fulfills a
campaign promise to
undo President Obama's
re-engagement with Cuba.
BARACK OBAMA, Former President
of the United States: Today,
the United States of America
is changing its relationship
with the people of Cuba.
JOHN YANG: In December 2014, Mr.
Obama restored diplomatic ties
with the island nation, after
more than 50 years of hostility.
In March 2016, he became the
first U.S. president to visit
Cuba in nearly a century.
President Trump says his
focus is halting the flow of
U.S. dollars to the communist
government.
DONALD TRUMP: Our policy will
seek a much better deal for
the Cuban people and for the
United States of America.
We do not want U.S. dollars to
prop up a military monopoly that
exploits and abuses the citizens
of Cuba.
JOHN YANG: The new policy bans
transactions with enterprises,
including hotels and other
tourist-related businesses,
ultimately owned by
the Cuban military.
Mr. Trump is also reinstating
a rule that restricts
individual travel, and requires
most visits to Cuba to be
in group tours organized
by American companies.
But the policy continues
direct commercial flights
between the two countries.
The administration will also
maintain the U.S. Embassy
in Havana, but still with no
ambassador.
In Havana today, Cubans reacted.
MAN (through translator):
Trump's words simply
seem a bit ambiguous.
If the governments want the
best for both the Cuban and
American people, they have to
look out for the common things
that exist between the two.
WOMAN (through translator): If
definitely feels like a huge
setback in the relationship
between Cuba and
the United States.
We will see what happens, but,
right now, I think it's like
going back to the Cold War.
JOHN YANG: None of the
changes will take effect
until the U.S. Treasury
and Commerce Departments
issue new regulations,
which could take months.
For more on the revised policy,
and how it's being understood
in Cuba, we turn to Alan
Gomez of USA Today, who
joins us from Havana.
Alan, thanks for being with us.
We heard in the tape
piece a little smattering
of some reaction from
the streets of Havana,
but I know you have been
out reporting today.
What are you hearing
from average Cubans in
Havana about this change?
ALAN GOMEZ, USA Today: I mean,
it's been a level of confusion,
of sadness, of disgust,
of anger.
You know, just imagine.
These people have lived here for
decades without any interaction
with the United States, with
the U.S. just treating
them as an enemy and
closing off to them.
Then, two-and-a-half years
ago, they get this opening, and
they talk about this period,
already in the past tense, as
this glorious period where they
were able to have more Americans
down here, interact with them
more, and visit the U.S. more.
And now Trump has taken it
not all away, but has really
cut that back significantly.
So, yes, there's a lot of anger
here right now and a lot of
confusion over why it's being
done.
JOHN YANG: How have they
talked about how their lives
have changed, what difference
this past two years
has been to them?
ALAN GOMEZ: Well, understand,
Cuba, the state-run economy, you
only get a certain salary from
the government.
You only get certain
benefits from the government.
So what they rely on so heavily
across the board is tourism.
And what it's done is infused a
whole lot of Americans down here
over these past two-and-a-half
years.
So you think about everybody
from private restaurant owners,
to private taxies, to tour
guides, all these people that
interact with Americans, they're
all the ones that are getting
that benefit directly.
President Trump talked a lot
today about how all of the money
that's been going down over
these last couple of
years is going straight
to the Cuban government.
But I can tell you, from being
down here quite a bit over the
last couple of years and talking
to folks today, that
they are saying that,
no, they get a lot of it.
Yes, of course some of it goes
to the government, but they're
upset that, to punish the Cuban
government, they're the ones
that are getting hurt as well.
JOHN YANG: How
will they get hurt?
How will life change for them
under these changed rules?
ALAN GOMEZ: Well, it's
a combination of things.
It's, quite simply, fewer
American tourists are going to
be able to make the trip because
of the way that the Trump
administration is going
to change the visa system.
It is going to be a lot
harder for American tourists
now to get to the U.S.
Right now, if you're an
American and want to come down
to Cuba, hop online, you can
figure out your trip, and you
can pretty much get your visa
at the airport counter on your
way down here.
Now they are going to go back
to the old way, where you have
to apply beforehand to the
federal government, get
approval to go down.
And so the people down
here in Cuba are just
expecting that that torrent
of American visitors
is going to dry up.
And then there's another aspect.
There are just all these
private business owners that
have had a lot of interaction
in the last few years, going
to the United States, working
with U.S. businesspeople,
getting training in the
United States and bringing
those lessons back to Cuba.
And so they're worried that that
is going to be limited as well.
JOHN YANG: Alan, in the
less than a minute we
have left, I want to ask
you about a development
on your regular beat,
which is immigration.
The Trump administration
announced last night
that they were going to
keep the program that
protects from deportation
undocumented immigrants
who came as children.
The president during the
campaign said he was going do
away with that, he was going
to change that Obama policy.
What do you make of this,
deciding to keep this?
ALAN GOMEZ: What the
president did was pretty
much eliminate a program
that would have protected
their parents from deportation.
That program, there's
no immediate effect of
that, because all --
that program had been
on hold in the courts
for some time now.
But what it does is, it
means that those parents
are never going to get
any sort of legal status
under this president.
And, more than that, it means
that those children that have
been protected from deportation
under the Deferred Action for
Childhood Arrivals program, now
they are worried that they are
going to have that
taken away from them.
JOHN YANG: Although, in the
president's announcement,
or the administration
announcement last night,
they specifically said that
that program would remain,
would remain in place.
Alan Gomez of USA Today
from Havana, Cuba,
thanks for joining us.
ALAN GOMEZ: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
the long road to recovery
after staying in the ICU; Mark
Shields and David Brooks take
on the week's news; and an
author explains why she went
against her friends'
advice and followed her
boyfriend to a new city.
But first: It was a shooting
that captured the nation's
attention last summer, at the
same time it was already
grappling with tensions
over police shootings.
And, today, the jury
reached a verdict in the
trial of the officer.
Hari Sreenivasan has the latest.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Philando
Castile was shot when his car
was pulled over for a traffic
stop last July.
His girlfriend was in the car,
and live-streamed the aftermath
on Facebook moments later.
Officer Jeronimo Yanez said
at the time that he believed
Castile was reaching for a gun.
Castile's family and
girlfriend disputed that.
Yanez had been charged with
second-degree manslaughter
and endangering safety.
This afternoon, a jury acquitted
him of all charges after
five days of deliberations.
Soon after, his mother
and sister came out
and spoke to reporters.
VALERIE CASTILE, Mother of
Philando Castile: My son was
murdered, and I will continue to
say murdered, because where
in this planet do you tell
the truth, and you be honest,
and you still be murdered by
the police of Minnesota, while
you have your seat belt on
and you're in the company
with a woman and a child?
My son would never jeopardize
anyone else's life.
ALLYSZA CASTILE, Sister of
Philando Castile: The system
really is wrong, and they really
failed us.
They really failed us,
once again, because my
brother was a good man.
You never even heard
him raise his voice.
You never even heard him yell.
And for that man to get on the
stand and lie, he got caught
in three, four, five different
lies.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It was
the most recent example
of an officer being
acquitted in a high-profile
shooting.
The jury had been
deadlocked in recent days.
Tim Nelson of Minnesota
Public Radio has been covering
the trial and joins me now.
Tim, first, you were
in the courtroom.
The reaction?
TIM NELSON, Minnesota
Public Radio: It was
swift and shocking.
The Castile family was
sitting in the courtroom.
The judge had asked people to
be quiet while the verdicts
were read, but as soon as the
not-guilty verdict for the
manslaughter account was
returned, Valerie Castile
-- that's Philando's
mother -- got up and
started shouting profanity
in the courtroom.
She had been -- the people in
the court had been told to wait
until all the verdicts were
read before they left, and
she pushed her way out, was
joined by many of her friends
and family, visibly upset,
very, very angry about
the verdict here today.
On the other side, the friends
and family, some of the fellow
officers of Jeronimo Yanez
were weeping as well,
clearly relieved that
this ordeal is over.
It's been going on
almost a year now.
He was charged in November.
So, a lot of angst
initially in the courtroom.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tim, the
county attorney when he was
bringing these charges said no
reasonable officer
would have used deadly
force in this situation.
Why wasn't he able
to convince a jury?
TIM NELSON: Well, I think there
were three real factors here.
One of them was, we saw for
the first time the squad car
video, the perspective of the
officer, or at least
from his dash-cam.
And what we saw was, this
happened very quickly.
And you could feel the emotion,
you could feel the tension in
this situation as it happened.
And it's confounding.
You can't see what was
actually going on in the car.
And I think that that
left some doubt there.
The other thing is, the defense
continued to return to the
THC found in Mr. Castile's
blood after he died.
They continued to suggest that
he had been smoking marijuana,
and that may have clouded
his judgment when he told the
officer that pulled him over
that he had a gun, that he
may not have done it in a way
that lessened the risk that
they both faced in this case.
And I think the third thing
in this case was Officer Yanez
actually taking the stand last
Friday.
He was near tears as he talked
about the fear he felt, the
tension he felt, the thoughts
of his family running through
his mind as he encountered
Philando Castile for those
first few seconds
of this incident.
So, it, I think, may have left
some doubt in the jury's mind.
And, you know, there are some
Supreme Court cases, Graham vs.
Connor, that give the benefit
of the doubt in a lot of these
cases to a police officer.
They urge the jury to think
about it from the officer's
perspective in the moment, not
in perfect 20/20 hindsight.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tim, we
learned in this process that
Mr. Castile had a permit for
that weapon.
But what's the level of concern
or anger in your community?
I remember, right after this
incident, there were protests
on your streets for days and
weeks.
TIM NELSON: Not
just on our streets.
They closed an interstate
between the two cities in what
authorities later called a
riot.
There were police officers
injured in that incident.
The protesters occupied
the front of the governor's
mansion for weeks here.
And, you know, you remember,
this happened just after the
shooting in Louisiana and had
been -- it sort of added
to the tension there.
We haven't seen those kinds of
protests lately, but as soon as
I walked out of the courtroom
today, as soon as I walked out
of the courthouse, there were
people with hand-lettered signs
shouting, making their
voices, their unhappiness
about this verdict.
So it's clear there are some
people who are very angry
about this, and we may see some
more of that coming up soon.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Tim Nelson of Minnesota
Public Radio, thanks so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: More than five
million Americans are admitted
into hospital intensive care
units, or ICUs, each year.
Undoubtedly, they are a crucial
component of the health care
system for treating seriously
ill patients and
preventing deaths.
But some patients also
eventually leave the ICU with
new complications and problems.
Special correspondent Jackie
Judd looks at those concerns
and an effort to make sure
patients are getting
the right interventions.
WOMAN: Well, as soon as we get
this ultrasound done, we are
going to get your lights on and
your windows open, OK?
JACKIE JUDD: Every year, almost
six million patients land in
an intensive care unit, and,
through often heroic
efforts, lives are saved.
For many of those survivors,
that period of time becomes
a bright line in their lives
of before and after.
PAUL TURPIN, Was Admitted to
ICU: I am very aware that I am
not the same person who went
into the hospital with sepsis.
I am just not.
JACKIE JUDD: In what ways?
PAUL TURPIN: Well,
my personality.
I'm shorter-tempered, mood
change, mild depression.
JACKIE JUDD: Paul Turpin,
an endocrinologist
who lives outside of
Nashville with his wife,
Mary Lou, spent a
month in an ICU.
That was two-and-a-half
years ago.
Richard Langford's first ICU
stay was a decade ago, and he
has not lived on his own since.
RICHARD LANGFORD, Was
Admitted to ICU: Mom is the
one who takes care of me.
Now, my mother is 88 years old.
JACKIE JUDD: Psychologist Jim
Jackson leads this support
group, and is part of a team
at Vanderbilt University Medical
Center that helped identify
a constellation of symptoms
mimicking PTSD, post-traumatic
stress disorder.
They call it post-intensive
care syndrome, or PICS.
JIM JACKSON, Vanderbilt
University Medical
Center: They don't have
a traumatic experience
in the way that a combat veteran
or a rape survivor would,
so they're not referred to
a mental health professional.
They really fall
through the cracks.
With all of these gaps, there
just is a lack of awareness.
How do you feel?
JACKIE JUDD: Dr. Wes Ely
has studied this phenomenon
for almost 20 years.
He says the risk factors are
clear: powerful sedatives and
prolonged use of ventilators,
which can trigger delirium.
Some ICU patients need
those interventions,
but not all of them do.
DR.
WES ELY, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center: We had to tie
people down, so they wouldn't
pull lines and tubes out, but
we also chemically restrained
them with these deep sedatives.
So we got comfortable pummeling
people's brains with gargantuan
amounts of benzodiazepines,
propofol, and other
types of sedation.
We put them in this cocoon,
but it wasn't a safe one.
And when we started measuring
delirium, and then started
measuring physical immobility,
it unveiled this issue of PICS.
WOMAN: Hi, sweetie.
Can you open your eyes?
JACKIE JUDD: A substantial
number of patients leave the ICU
with newly-acquired problems,
ranging from dementia,
to depression, to muscle
and nerve disease.
Dr. Ely has been following
some of them for six years,
and will soon release a study.
Preliminary data show one-third
of patients improve and get
back to normal cognitive and
functioning levels.
One-third remain the same as
the day they left the hospital.
And one-third
decline even further.
WOMAN: We should talk about
whether we should move the tube
to the neck, OK, because that
will allow us to
decrease the amount of
sedation that you're on.
JACKIE JUDD: So, leaders
in acute care developed a
different ICU treatment.
When possible, they keep
patients out of the cocoon
by reducing the use of
drugs and ventilators,
and by getting patients moving.
WES ELY: Turning off of sedation
every day and turning off
the ventilator every day gets
people out of the hospital
sooner, it decreases
cost of care and it
helps improve survival.
JACKIE JUDD: Hospitals across
the country have been slow
to adopt the practices in use
here at Vanderbilt.
It's been more than four
years since the Society
of Critical Care Medicine
issued new treatment
guidelines for controlling pain
and delirium in the ICU, and,
yet today, the organization
describes compliance
as mediocre.
MAN: We're going to
get you every day up
as much as we can, OK?
JACKIE JUDD: Coaxing patients
out of bed to exercise takes
a lot more staff time than
sedating them.
And getting doctors to change
what has long been done is hard.
WES ELY: A lot of it has
to do with people in long
white coats, the doctors.
The doctors are used
to how they do things.
They don't want to be told
to do it a different way,
and they're late adopters.
We have early adopters in life,
and we have late adopters,
and the doctors think, well,
this is an invisible problem.
I don't see it.
I don't see it as
an issue anyway.
They can't even necessarily
envision what it is that
could happen so much better.
JACKIE JUDD: Vanderbilt used
to release patients from
the ICU with no follow-up.
Now it is one of a handful of
hospitals with post-ICU clinics.
It's a way station
for patients at risk.
The goal is to be a bridge to
a medical world with little
awareness of the syndrome.
Dr. Carla Sevin is
one of the founders.
DR.
CARLA SEVIN, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center: The
main purpose of the clinic is
to sort of bridge this
million-dollar intensive
care time to this
outpatient status, which
is not set up to take care of
the multipronged problems that
people experience after the
ICU.
RICHARD LANGFORD: That
might be permanent.
JACKIE JUDD: The clinic also
organizes the support group
where Richard Langford is a
regular.
RICHARD LANGFORD: It helps
give me a structure for why I'm
feeling the way I do, and that
I'm not going crazy.
This anxiety, it is -- is not
something that will kill me.
It's not something that
I have to worry about,
and keep worrying about
worrying about worrying.
PAUL TURPIN: Thank you,
lord, for this nice day.
JACKIE JUDD: As for Paul Turpin,
he is happily back practicing
medicine, and still managing
emotional ups and downs,
including a lingering
sense of terror, which
is common among ICU
patients.
PAUL TURPIN: Fear of
ever being in an ICU.
JACKIE JUDD: What is
that fear rooted in?
PAUL TURPIN: Being back in
those circumstances, being out
of control, being wrapped up in
that cocoon.
JACKIE JUDD: Is it what
you fear the most in
your life at the moment?
PAUL TURPIN: Probably.
WES ELY: You know, you're
an inspiration to us.
JACKIE JUDD: Dr. Ely, who
travels worldwide to spread the
word about PICS, says he senses
a momentum to shift ICU
care in order to reduce
the harm it can cause.
WES ELY: People were built to
be vertical and moving around,
not lying in a bed 24/7.
So we're trying to get back to
the humanness of critical care.
JACKIE JUDD: Even so, he
predicts it will be at least
five years before what happens
in this ICU becomes the norm for
patients being treated at the
most vulnerable and frightening
time of their lives.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Jackie Judd in
Nashville, Tennessee.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And to the
analysis of Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist
Mark Shields and New York
Times columnist David Brooks.
So, gentlemen, it's been
another tumultuous week,
on top of several others.
We have had the attorney general
of the United States testifying
before the Senate Intelligence
Committee.
And then we learned, I guess
in the last 48 hours, Mark,
that the investigation by the
special counsel into the
Russia meddling in the election
has been expanded to include
whether or not the
president committed
obstruction of justice.
Is this a one-alarm
crisis, two-alarm?
Are we making too
big a deal of this?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, based
on what the president
- - how the president's
reacting, Judy, I don't
think we're making
too big a deal of it.
I mean, the president, having
acted briefly presidential after
the tragedy of the shooting
of Steve Scalise and the others
at the baseball field, has
reverted to form and gone back
to, as you reported at the
outset, now the man who told
me to fire the FBI director is
after me because -- is
investigating me because
of firing of the FBI
director, which is totally
contradictory to what the
president said to Lester Holt
on NBC, that the recommendation
of Rod Rosenstein had nothing
to do with his decision to fire
James Comey as FBI director,
that it was based solely on
Donald Trump's desire, as he
expressed to the Russians the
next day in the Oval
Office, to get the Russian
investigation behind him.
And so I just think that he is
behaving like a man who really
wants to fire Robert Mueller
and, you know, who didn't live
through October 20, 1973, when
President Nixon ordered Elliot
Richardson to fire Archibald
Cox and the independent counsel,
and he refused and resigned.
And William Rucklehaus,
his deputy, resigned.
And we had a
constitutional crisis.
And it led to
impeachment hearings.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president is
calling it a witch-hunt, David.
The White House is saying
he didn't -- isn't going to
fire the special counsel.
But it isn't clear.
There have been
reports out about that.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, it
may be a witch-hunt, but
he's acting like a witch.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: To me, we have
had this -- the idea that there
has been collusion between
the Russians and the
Trump campaign has been
investigated for a long time.
And so far, we have had no
really serious evidence that
they did collude, and everything
else seems to be leaking out.
So, I begin to be a
little suspicious -- and
maybe I'm wrong -- we
will see over the long
term -- whether there was
any actual act of collusion.
There were certainly
conversations maybe
about some building and
some investment, but so
far, no evidence of
an underlying crime.
But this, to me, is
not a criminal story.
It is a psychological story.
And it's a story about
a president who seems to
be under more pressure,
under more threat,
lashing out in ways that are
painfully self-destructive,
but also extremely
disturbing to anybody around
him.
And so whether it's the North
Korean Cabinet hearing that
he held recently, where they
all had to praise him, or the
tweets as late as this morning,
this is not a president who
is projecting mental stability.
And the idea that he will
fire somebody, whether
it's Mueller or anybody
else, seems very plausible.
And so, to me, if there is
something really damaging here,
it's something that has not
yet happened caused by
the psychological pressure
that he apparently feels.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It is.
People are referring, are
reflecting back, Mark, to the
Whitewater investigation, the
Watergate investigation, that
what happened after the original
alleged crime made whatever
happened in the first
place much worse.
MARK SHIELDS: Well, the two
iron rules of Washington
scandals, Judy, is, it's never
the act itself.
Rule one, it's
always the cover-up.
And rule two is, everybody
always forgets rule one.
And that's -- but I think we
have got -- I'm not ready for
the clean bill of health yet.
We have got the transition to
go through and The New York
Times' Matt Apuzzo and Michael
Schmidt's story this week that
suggested that Robert Mueller
was looking at money laundering,
that this would have been the
way, through the Russians, that
had been -- the beneficiaries
had received their payments
through offshore banks.
This kind of opened up a
new avenue that's reported
in The New York Times.
And so I just think that,
Judy, the abject lack, absence
of curiosity on the part of
the president in his
nine conversations with
the FBI correct or any
other -- anybody else,
and with the attorney
general before the Senate
Intelligence Committee,
abject lack of curiosity
in how the Russians did it.
I mean, you would come in
and you say 17 intelligence
agencies have concluded
the Russians tried
to sabotage the American
electoral process, and
there's not a single
question about, what
did they do, how did they
do it, how can we avoid it,
what can we do in the future?
Geez, no, let's go, let's
find the three million
people who were illegally
voting in California
instead.
We will appoint a
commission for that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I mean, Mark
does have a point, David, that
when the attorney general was
asked about the -- a number
of things, one of the things
he said was that he had not
been briefed at all on
the Russia meddling.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
And that's in part why
it's a psychological issue.
Every contact we know where
Donald Trump had conversations
about the Russia thing, he saw
through the prism of his
own victory and would he
get credit for the victory.
And it's perfectly plausible for
a normal human being to think,
well, I won the presidency,
but the Russians also did
seriously endanger interests,
the American political system,
and, therefore, I'm
going to go after that.
And so he -- but he's incapable
of seeing that second part.
It's just, am I getting
full credit for what
I think I achieved?
And so it's the intellectual
insecurity that I think
is overshadowing all else.
And that, by definition, can
spill -- this is why it's a
little different than Whitewater
and Watergate.
Nixon has his own psychological
complexities, but he was
someone who acted at least maybe
in Machiavellian ways, but in
straightforward, linear ways.
And, certainly, that
was true of Clinton.
With this team, no.
And then the second thing to
be said is, Clinton had very
competent people around him, and
so did Richard Nixon.
That's not the case here.
And you talked to the people
in the Clinton White House, it
was hell to be in that White
House.
They tried to build
these Chinese walls, so
they could do their jobs
while the investigation
was going on, and it was
super tough for them.
I imagine, especially when you
have got tweetstorms coming out,
it's near impossible to do your
job right now in any corner
of the Trump administration.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tweetstorms
from the president.
MARK SHIELDS: Just two
quick points, Judy.
And that is, Richard
Nixon was no Donald Trump.
I mean, Richard Nixon had
served four years in the United
States Navy as an officer, 14
years in the House and
the Senate, eight years
as vice president, and
was a constant reader
of history and biography, may
have been the best-prepared
president in terms of experience
in the history of the
nation, and has a record
of achievement that --
amply documented character
defects and criminal
activity, but a historic
record of achievement,
whether it's OSHA or
EPA or whatever else.
The two things that David's
mentioned, of that Cabinet
meeting, it was the most awkward
event I have seen in 50 years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This is when
he went around the table and
asked each Cabinet member...
MARK SHIELDS: To tell how
wonderful you were, not what I
did -- not only what I did on my
vacation, but how
wonderful you are.
And there wasn't a single
member of that Cabinet,
with the exception of
Jim Mattis, the secretary
of defense, who escaped with
his or her self-respect intact.
I mean, it was:
You're wonderful.
They love you in Mississippi.
You're doing a great job.
Everybody's better.
The economy is better.
Everything is terrific.
I mean, this was just
-- this was scary.
And the final thing was,
yesterday, he goes after Hillary
Clinton again, crooked Hillary.
I mean, he's trying to
rerun that 2016 election.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, all
this takes place, David,
in a week when, as you
both have mentioned,
the shooting happened.
Republicans are practicing
for their annual
baseball game against the
Democrats in Congress,
and this man comes into
town from Illinois.
He ends up being killed,
grievously wounds
Congressman Steve Scalise,
still in the hospital
in critical condition.
After this, we see a coming
together of the parties.
I wanted to show a picture.
This is from the baseball game
last night, where you had --
or two nights ago -- where
you had the four leaders of
Congress there for once -- I
don't think we have ever seen
a picture like this -- coming
together looking like they at
least can tolerate each other.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
And the thing that's symptomatic
of me -- for me is, I used
to think polarization was a
Washington phenomenon, that
the people on Capitol Hill
were polarized, but the country
was sort of still
a moderate nation.
But I think there is little
evidence to support that now.
This is a polarized country.
And most of the politicians
I know, members of Congress,
hate the system they're in.
They're stuck in a much
more polarized world than
they wish they were in.
And it's out of the country.
And that doesn't say the
shooter is any way symptomatic.
If anything, he's
an atypical nutcase.
But it is a sign on the fringes.
We have seen a ratcheting
up of violence.
We saw it, I thought, at the
conventions on both sides.
We saw it at the Trump
rallies on both sides.
And the people on the fringes
of society, we have just
seen a ratcheting up in their
feeling of justification
that they can resort
to violent means.
And this guy apparently
had a list of people,
according to what's being
reported this afternoon,
of people he wanted to shoot.
And so that's weaponizing
mentally disordered people
through the process of
political extremism.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is this
coming together at all, Mark?
Do you see any enduring --
any endurance of that, or is
that just -- is it just going
to be a blip?
MARK SHIELDS: You hope,
Judy, but to David's
point, both parties --
according to Pew Research,
in both parties, what drives
the most activist wing is not
support and energy and advocacy
of their own side.
It's loathing of the other side.
That's the gauge as to whether
you're going to be politically
involved, you're going to
vote, and whether you're going
to contribute, how much do you
loathe the other party, how
much do you hate them.
And there was a time, I will
be very blunt, when I came to
Washington, when the legitimacy
of your opponent was
never questioned.
You questioned their judgment.
You questioned their opinions
or their arguments, but
you never their legitimacy.
And that changed.
And it changed.
And one of the reasons
it changed is that a
man was elected from
the state of Georgia
who ran on the book, and the
book was, you use these words.
You use sick.
You refer pathetic, traitor,
liar, corrupt, shame,
enemy of normal Americans.
This was Newt Gingrich's bible.
It wasn't an idea of a policy.
It wasn't a program.
He used it and he
became successful.
He became speaker of the House.
Donald Trump is a
clone of Newt Gingrich.
Donald Trump used, Donald Trump,
lying Ted, and lightweight
Bobby Jindal, and Mitt Romney
choked like a dog, and
used that language.
And you're right.
The left has used similar
language and there has been a
response and almost a premium on
going after Trump in the
same sort of language.
But there's been no punishment.
There's no political
downside for this tactic.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just 45 seconds.
Is one side more
responsible than another?
And are we going to
see any of this coming
together last, or is it...
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, to me,
in 1970, people were asked,
would you mind it if your son
or daughter married someone
of the opposing party?
And 5 percent would mind.
Now 40 percent mind, because
people think your political
affiliation is a sign of your
worth, your values,
your philosophy, your
culture, your lifestyle.
It's everything.
All of a sudden, we have been
reduced to politics and we have
made politics into the ultimate
source of our souls.
And that's -- it's
just -- that's not
what it should bearing.
It's just about arguments
about tax rates.
It's not everything.
MARK SHIELDS:
That's a good point.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Brooks,
Mark Shields, thank you both.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: New college
graduates are making
their way out into the
world with new rules,
social circles and
morning alarms.
Caroline Kitchener is the
author of "Post Grad: Five
Women and Their First Year Out
of College."
In tonight's In My Humble
Opinion, she offers some advice
that counters what she and her
peers were raised to believe.
CAROLINE KITCHENER, Author,
"Post Grad: Five Women and Their
First Year Out of College":
When I was a kid, Dr. Barbie was
the only Barbie in my closet,
and Disney princess movies
always prompted the same
conversation with my mother:
Happy endings absolutely do not
require a Prince Charming.
All the adult women in my life
had to fight against the same
expectations: Get married,
have kids, let someone
else make money.
And so they were intent
on creating a new set
of expectations for me.
Over the years, I became more
and more convinced: Marriage,
even a serious relationship, was
a kind of weakness.
Strong women didn't need anyone.
While I was in college, my
female friends and I were
pressured to lean in and strive
for one particular kind
of success: the best, most
fulfilling career possible.
For high-achieving women my
age, romantic relationships
were supposed to be far less
important, put on the back
burner until we were well on
our way to a corner office.
This was where my values
started to clash with real life.
After graduation, I was going
to write a book, and all of my
writing contacts were in New
York.
There, I would have a
much stronger professional
network than I would
living in any other city.
But my boyfriend
got a job in D.C.
When I started telling people
that I was moving to D.C. to be
with Robert, they all gave me
this sort of sad, pitying look.
They said things like: "Really?
But you're so young."
I spent my first year after
graduation shadowing four
of my female classmates
and writing about
their transition from
college to real life.
It was a rough year.
Our entire lives, we'd
been surrounded by this
big, supportive community,
parents, teachers,
a group of friends our own age.
When all that went away,
we felt more alone than
we ever had before.
We wanted to lean on a partner.
And that made us feel
intensely guilty.
Sometimes, though, relationships
can help us find our footing
in an entirely new world.
My point isn't that all women
should prioritize relationships
after graduation, just that
those of us who do shouldn't
be demonized for it.
Guys who follow their
girlfriends don't get
the same judgment.
Instead, they're often
celebrated for being
progressive or modern.
People say, that's so sweet,
or, wow, he really loves her.
And we should ask ourselves why
those different reactions exist,
and why young women continue
to be judged for making
the same decisions as men.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A
lesson for all of us.
And a news update before we go.
A U.S. Navy destroyer, the
Fitzgerald, has collided with
a merchant ship off Japan.
The destroyer suffered
damage and some flooding,
but is now sailing back
to port in Yokosuka.
The Seventh Fleet says that
one sailor was injured.
Another Navy destroyer and two
tugs are being sent to help.
The merchant vessel
is sailing to Tokyo.
And Robert Costa is preparing
for "Washington Week."
Bob, what's on tap?
ROBERT COSTA: Well, Judy, in
the wake of this week's shooting
at a GOP baseball practice,
Democrats are reaching
out to Republicans to work
together on health care.
Could it be the first
step toward bipartisan
action in Congress?
That's tonight on
"Washington Week" -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
we will be watching.
And we will be back right here
on Monday with a look ahead to
the most expensive congressional
race in U.S. history:
Georgia's special election.
That's the "NewsHour"
for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and good night.